WIP some more consensus (#8)
cardano-scaling/cardano-blueprint: src/consensus/README.md

# The Consensus and Storage Layers

In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

This document is a work in progress. We strive to provide a set of requirements for and responsibilities of the Consensus layer that is agnostic of a particular implementation.

> The data stored by a Cardano block is precisely the data used and produced by the Consensus and Ledger layers, it is therefore reasonable to pair such layers together in a single component, although separate components could also be envisioned. Note however that the bandwith between such components is very high.

Reviewer: I think this is a very important point, but I suggest we stay focused in this section. Perhaps we could move this paragraph somewhere more top-level?

> # The Consensus and Storage Layers

Author: >Shouldn't we still mention that this documentation is based on the Haskell implementation?

I don't think so. Although it _is_ now it _should not be_ or _not necessarily_.

> What about keeping the sentence about the goal of the document

It was resurrected in the new organization

> In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

Author: The components I refer to here are the Consensus and the Storage layer. The page for each shows a diagram for each of their internal components.

> In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

Reviewer 2: I meant an architecture diagram putting the consensus components in context of the whole node

> In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

Author: Added

> In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

Author: Ah the image didn't load when I first saw this. My diagram was much simpler. Let me rework it this way

> In this document, we describe the necessary components comprising the Consensus and Storage layers of a Cardano blockchain node. The main goal of this report is to provide guidance to software engineers that intend to implement such layers of a Cardano node from scratch.

Author: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a915d3c1-c543-4ddd-8b7c-fdbefb7efcc7)
I even tweaked it a bit more. I think now it is very clear

This document is a work in progress. We strive to provide a set of requirements for and responsibilities of the Consensus layer that is agnostic of a particular implementation.

> The data stored by a Cardano block is precisely the data used and produced by the Consensus and Ledger layers, it is therefore reasonable to pair such layers together in a single component, although separate components could also be envisioned. Note however that the amount of traffic between such components is very high.

Author: Do you think that they should be separate layers in the blueprint? Consensus is the only one that reads and writes to the storage layer, and the storage layer only purpose is to satisfy Consensus needs.

I could see how they can be completely independent components in theory but explaining one without the other seems weird to me.

> The data stored by a Cardano block is precisely the data used and produced by the Consensus and Ledger layers, it is therefore reasonable to pair such layers together in a single component, although separate components could also be envisioned. Note however that the amount of traffic between such components is very high.

Reviewer 2: that's an interesting exercise, and one that could lead into insights into why they are independent and could be separate components.

> The data stored by a Cardano block is precisely the data used and produced by the Consensus and Ledger layers, it is therefore reasonable to pair such layers together in a single component, although separate components could also be envisioned. Note however that the amount of traffic between such components is very high.

Reviewer 3: I'm not against `src/storage` if that is what is implied here. Either way, I want to invite you both to feel free to move things one way or another and see what sticks best.

> The data stored by a Cardano block is precisely the data used and produced by the Consensus and Ledger layers, it is therefore reasonable to pair such layers together in a single component, although separate components could also be envisioned. Note however that the amount of traffic between such components is very high.

Author: The paragraph is gone now.

> that exists in the network. Therefore it necessitates of a fast diffusion layer

Author: Moved to a different section

for blocks to arrive on time to the next block minters.

## Requirements imposed onto the Ledger layer

> The role of the ledger is to define what is stored _on_ the blockchain. From the perspective of the consensus

Author: I think it depends on what one understands by `what is stored _on_ the blockchain`. To me that means what is in the blocks, i.e. what transaction types are there and which of them are valid in which cases. 

Does this sound better?
```suggestion
The role of the Ledger layer is to define what is stored _inside_ the
blocks of the blockchain. It is involved in mutating the _Ledger State_ which is the
result of applying blocks from the chain and can be used to validate
further blocks or transactions. From the perspective of the consensus
```

> The role of the ledger is to define what is stored _on_ the blockchain. From the perspective of the consensus

Author: I think I made it more clear with the last rewordings.

> The role of the ledger is to define what is stored _on_ the blockchain. From the perspective of the consensus

Author: No, Consensus decides which blocks get into the blockchain, but the data in those blocks belongs to the Ledger.

layer, the ledger has four primary responsibilities:

> - Applying blocks: The most obvious and most important responsibility of the ledger is to define how the

Author: The Ledger does have a notion of blocks, at least at the moment: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/master/libs/cardano-ledger-core/src/Cardano/Ledger/Block.hs

> - Applying blocks: The most obvious and most important responsibility of the ledger is to define how the

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I know but that's more or less something we would want to move out of ledger IIRC?

> - Applying blocks: The most obvious and most important responsibility of the ledger is to define how the

Author: I don't think that is the idea. There were conversations of taking https://cardano-ledger.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-protocol-tpraos/index.html out of the ledger, but not the concept of blocks.

> - Applying blocks: The most obvious and most important responsibility of the ledger is to define how the

Author: No, applying blocks is a Ledger responsibility. Managing those blocks and choosing which ones to apply is a Consensus responsibility (chain selection).

> ledger state changes in response to new blocks, validating blocks at it goes and rejecting invalid

Author: It is not. It is aware of blocks too. 
```
-- in ledger
data Block h era
  = Block' !h !(TxSeq era) BSL.ByteString
```

blocks.

- Applying transactions: Similar to applying blocks, the ledger layer also must provide an interface for
applying a single transaction to the ledger state. This is important, because the consensus layer does
not just deal with previously constructed blocks, but also constructs new blocks.

- Ticking time: Some parts of the ledger state change due to the passage of time only. For example, blocks
might schedule some changes to be applied later, and then when the relevant slot arrives those
changes should be applied, independent from any blocks.

> - Forecasting: Some consensus protocols require limited information from the ledger. In Praos, for example,

Author: >provides information needed by the consensus to validate blocks

This is only half accurate. The Ledger provides information that the Consensus layer gives back to the ledger rules to validate blocks. Validation does not happen in Consensus, it circles back to Ledger.

> - Forecasting: Some consensus protocols require limited information from the ledger. In Praos, for example,

Reviewer 2: I meant the _header_ validation of course.

a node’s probability of being a slot leader is proportional to its stake, but the stake distribution is
something that the ledger keeps track of. We refer to this as a view on the ledger, and we require
not just that the ledger can give us a view on the current ledger state, but also predict what that

> view will be for slots in the near future.

Author: I'd rather keep `limited`
